Add Default Apps Domain enhancement (#432)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/ingress/default-apps-domain.md

---
title: default-apps-domain
authors:
  - "@dustman9000"
reviewers:
  - "@Miciah"
  - "@danehans"
  - "@frobware"
  - "@knobunc"
  - "@sgreene570"
approvers:
  - "@knobunc"
  - "@Miciah"
creation-date: 2020-08-12
last-updated: 2020-09-04
status: implementable
---

# Default Apps Domain

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [X] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary

> This enhancement allows for the configuration of a default apps domain in which
> can be used to set the default host and domain of the route, if not specified by
> the admin. Instead of using the default cluster domain, this new setting can be
> used to override it when set.

Reviewer: Usually I assume "admin" means the cluster administrator, and this enhancement is focused on user-created routes, right?
```suggestion
This enhancement allows for the configuration of a default apps domain, which
can be used to specify an alternative default domain for user-created routes.
This alternative domain, if specified, overrides the default cluster domain for the
purpose of determining the default host for a newly created route.
```

Author: Good point. Yes, this is mainly for user-created routes.

## Motivation

Many customers have requested "Custom Domains" in which they would like an already
installed Openshift cluster to support additional domains for their apps by default.
This domain is owned by a customer in which they would point a wildcard CNAME record
to an existing well known CNAME record.

### Goals

1. Enable the cluster administor to specify the default apps domain seperate
from the installed cluster domain.

## Proposal

> The Ingress API is extended by adding an optional `AppsDomain` field with type

Author: Yes, I'll make it more clear.

`string`.

```go
type IngressSpec struct {
    ...

>     // optional domain to be used instead of Domain installed cluster domain
>     // when Route Subdomain is unspecified.

Reviewer: I don't understand the phrase "Domain installed cluster domain"; do you mean the value set at install time?
```suggestion
    // appsDomain is an optional domain to use instead of the one specified
    // in the domain field when a Route is created without specifying an explicit
    // host.  If appsDomain is nonempty, this value is used to generate default
    // host values for Route.  Unlike domain, appsDomain may be modified after
    // installation.
```

    // This assumes a new ingresscontroller has been setup with a wildcard
    // certificate.
    // +optional
    AppsDomain string `json:"appsDomain,omitempty"`
}
```

The following example configures apps.acme.io as the default apps domain.

```yaml
apiVersion: config.openshift.io/v1
kind: Ingress
metadata:
  name: cluster
spec:
  domain: apps.drow-dev01.w9h5.s1.openshiftapps.com
  appsDomain: apps.acme.io
```

### Implementation Details

Implementation of this enhancement requires changes in the following repositories:

* openshift/api
* openshift/cluster-openshift-apiserver-operator

In [config/v1/types_ingress.go](https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/master/config/v1/types_ingress.go) of [openshift/api](https://github.com/openshift/api), add new field: `appsDomain`.

> In [observe_ingresses.go](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-openshift-apiserver-operator/blob/master/pkg/operator/configobservation/ingresses/observe_ingresses.go) of [openshift/cluster-openshift-apiserver-operator](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-openshift-apiserver-operator), add logic to check if `appsDomain` is set. If that field is set use it insead of Spec.Domain for the value of `routingDomain`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In [observe_ingresses.go](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-openshift-apiserver-operator/blob/master/pkg/operator/configobservation/ingresses/observe_ingresses.go) of [openshift/cluster-openshift-apiserver-operator](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-openshift-apiserver-operator), add logic to check if `appsDomain` is set. If that field is set, use it instead of `spec.Domain` for the value of `routingDomain`.
```

Author: Yes, that's what I meant. Thanks.

### Risks and Mitigations

Certain routes are created by various operators at install time. These routes
could be potentially be deleted and re-added post-install time. Implementation

> must ensure these routes use the original domain when re-added.

Reviewer: Does "Implementation" means whatever operator creates the route?  For example, cluster-foo-operator creates route "foo", and after this enhancement, cluster-foo-operator must ensure that it specifies a value for `spec.host` based on `domain` from the cluster ingress config when the operator creates route "foo".

Author: That's correct. The concern here is that if the route was created by an operator without a `spec.host` value, if the route is re-added it could take on the new `spec.appsDomain` value.

Reviewer 2: @dustman9000 what do you propose the operators that utilize routes do to circumvent this? Console and auth come to mind...after this enhancement is implemented, should the console/auth operators be specifying `spec.host` on their routes?

Author: @sgreene570 - Correct, there is no need to move the console/oauth routes under the new domain. For now, since this enhancement is primarily for user-created routes, I would suggest we restrict this enhancement to user-created namespaces (ie. not in openshift-* and redhat-*).

Reviewer: @sgreene570, note that setting `appsDomain` is day-2 (post-install) configuration.  This means that operators will have already created the routes, and the API will have set default values for `spec.host` based on the ingress domain if the operators did not specify `spec.host`.  The only concern is that the cluster administrator could modify `appsDomain` and something could subsequently delete the operator-created routes, and if the operators then recreated the routes without specifying an explicit `spec.host` value, they API would use the wrong domain (`appsDomain` instead of `domain`) for the operator-created routes.

Reviewer: The authentication operator specifies `spec.host`:  https://github.com/openshift/cluster-authentication-operator/blob/b9d7a84f9db82d0e622b0d0b9c5d9162e810985f/pkg/controllers/metadata/metadata_controller.go#L245

The console operator does not:  https://github.com/openshift/console-operator/blob/b195cebf52ea7af30178f4704ac269f482d70208/pkg/console/subresource/route/route.go#L69-L85

@spadgett, to address this contingency, it might make sense for the console operator to do something similar to the authentication operator for the console's default route.

## Design Details

### Test Plan

1. Create an IngressController with wildcard domain (e.g. `*.apps.acme.io`) and wildcard
certificate.
2. Create or modify the `cluster` Ingress, setting the test domain to the `appsDomain`
field.
3. Create a pod with a simple HTTP application that sends a static response (e.g. hello-openshift).
4. Create route for this application (without specifing --host).
5. Ensure new route HOST/PORT uses the appsDomain set in step 2, rather than the cluster domain.
6. Send request to this new route.

> 7. Verify there is a valid response with no TLS errors.

Reviewer: Where would this test be?  For example, would this be an E2E test in cluster-ingress-operator, in cluster-openshift-apiserver-operator, or something else?

Author: I've clarified where this test would reside.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

> On upgrade, the value of the Ingress `appsDomain` field remains in effect.

Reviewer: On upgrade, the value of `appsDomain` will be empty, so the route host defaulting behavior will remain unchanged.

On downgrade, the value of `appsDomain` will no longer be used for route host defaulting, but existing routes will remain unchanged (nothing automatically modifies `spec.host` on the route once the route is created).

Author: Thanks, updated.
